# MIDGE MAISEL 
>The person I am going to talk about today is Miriam Maisel ( aka midge ) from the [Marvelous Mrs Maisel](https://www.primevideo.com/detail/The-Marvelous-Mrs-Maisel/0SKQT5MHXXQ50OZ9FXYRFVEQM7) - subtle endorsement *hehe*). As to why I chose her for my character analysis → she inspires me to move when I feel stagnant. I did consider a few other complex female characters (Maeve from sex education, Monroe (another **extremely** complicated character to analyse) but there was a part in the prompt which said “…influenced your way of thinking” and I can’t necessarily say that about those other characters. Now let’s segue into the *Marvelous* world of * drum roll * Midge

## SETTING THE STAGE - A PERFECT LIFE
Miriam was born in New York in the year 1933. She was brought up in the Upper west side (the richer, more affluent part of New York) and she went to Bryn Mawr where she studied Russian literature. It was here she met the love of her life - Joel Maisel. She married him, they bought a house in the Upper West Side (calling it a house is very much an understatement) and she had 2 kids. Her father is a mathematics professor at Columbia University, her mother - a housewife ( a very common thing in that time period ). The first thing anyone notices about Midge is her energy (the next thing being her amazing outfits). She is the spotlight wherever she goes. She is commanding, verbose and great at getting what she wants . She made the best brisket, she has measured herself every day since she was a teenager and she could ingratiate herself with anyone with her funny demeanor and irresistible charm. In summation she was the perfect housewife. 

## TUMBLE DOWN, TUMBLE DOWN
One of my favorite poems is something I was taught in nursery school. 
>Jack and Jill went up the hill to fetch a pail of water, Jack fell down and broke his crown and Jill came tumbling after.

I did not wonder about the history or the political interpretation of it in nursery but what I did understand is that Jack fell down first and broke his crown (ego) and then Jill came tumbling down. Every character has one moment in their life, something momentous,something that rocks their fundamental morals and principles which makes them question what they want to become -the hero, the anti hero or the villain? It's a series of rolls, like those domino videos on youtube that I end up watching at 3am for no reason. Someone causes the first tumble. Joel cheats on midge```(tumble 1)``` the night before Yom Kippur with his secretary Penny Pan ( one more time for the people who have watched the show - **PENNY PAN**) and leaves her that night packing up his things in her suitcase (the irony). Midge gets drunk , gets on the subway, goes to Gaslight (a downtown club) and gets on the stage. Joel wanted to be a comedian (as a side hustle) and Midge used to watch him perform and take notes for him to improvise ( I will not go into the details of why Joel cheated on her but one thing of relevance here is that he was dependent on her, even for little things.  She thought the world of him and never challenged his ego. She was dependable and she fixed things for him). Midge realises that she has a knack for comedy but the transition from housewife to comedienne does not proceed smoothly .Here we see midge’s ambitious side, she gets a job as a makeup counter girl at B Altman,she refuses to take Joel back when he does come back, she starts performing at small clubs but we see the ripple effects of her new passion affecting everything around her. In a bird’s eye perspective we see that Midge making this transition ```(tumble 2)``` indirectly causes her mother to stand up for herself to her sexist family ```(tumble 3)``` leaving her with no resources to fall back on and her father leaving bell labs to become a journalist at a small newspaper agency to make a difference in the world ```(tumble 4)```. All of this does not happen overnight, but i did feel like including this here to show Midge’s effect on everyone around her. 

## GREATNESS    
Midge is relentless. She knows that she is a great comedienne and she just keeps going. Whether it’s sub-par shows in Philly, a club where the kitchen caught on fire, rude male performers, she kills every set with her raw, honest and very much feminist sets. 
>“Comedy is fueled by oppression, by the lack of power, by sadness and disappointment, by abandonment and humiliation. Now who the hell does that describe more than women? Judging by those standards only women should be funny."

As her character develops, we start to see the cracks in Miriam's perfect life. Miriam is privileged. She is resistant to change. She was sheltered her entire life, moving directly from a beautiful home to a beautiful college to a beautiful family of her own. She has not faced any hurdles at any point of her life. She does not know adversity and has gotten everything she wanted all her life which means she does not take no for an answer. Ever. She is a prickly heroine and as ironic as it is, It’s not the good parts of Midge's personality that make her likeable the viewer relates to,but the faulty edges. Inspite of being intelligent enough to be called one of the best comedians in the same time period as Lenny Bruce, she is awfully ignorant. Ignorant of the political issues of her time, not directly of her own fault. She is ignorant of the effect her words have. This is seen when she starts giving a harmless toast in her friend’s wedding and ends up outing the fact that it’s a shotgun wedding. She is ignorant of the fact that people around her have issues too. She gets angry and upset over Susie picking up another client to manage even though Susie makes very less from Midge’s shows and lives a completely different lifestyle compared to her.

## ANGER
Even though Miriam's anger brings out her best on stage it is also the same anger that led to some of her more questionable decisions.She thinks she is wonderful and charming enough for anyone to like her(narcissistic) that she overlooks instances where she could have potentially hurt other people. One of the most pivotal moments of her life (*spoiler alert if you have not watched the show*) is when her contract with Shy baldwin - a famous singer with the voice of an angel. Why? She was so afraid of bombing at the Apollo (fear of failure) that she decided to talk about Shy’s personal life on stage almost outing a closeted gay black man at a time period where just being a black person meant you weren’t considered equal. The more interesting part of this event is how she chose to respond to it. Yes, she did have the right to talk to Shy about it (they were close friends at that point) but she refuses to acknowledge the part where her words could have done irreversible damage to this man and instead gets angry and shouts at the cab driver on her way home. One point in her defense is that maybe a male comic in the same situation as her could have been treated differently but that does not reverse the crime. She had to be taught about boundaries but she reacts with violent outbursts. Another controversial point that most of the critics of this show point out is that she took a valuable lesson about boundaries and made it into it a feminist issue and it being a man’s world. Do not get me wrong, it is a man’s world but that particular incident had very little to do with it. 

## SUPPORT
I cannot talk about midge, without talking about the people who have directly or indirectly influenced several pivotal moments of her career.
In terms of navigating a male dominated field, there were moments where she had to get the help of a male figure in her life to sort out some situations. 
>"Unfortunately, sometimes to make things work in a man's world,you need a man."

When a club manager refused to pay her because no one in the audience drank during her performance, Joel comes to the club and punches the manager, which is when he agreed to pay her. When she does not get opportunities from any clubs in the city because she ill-mouthed another very popular female comedian on stage, Lenny Bruce steps in and helps her get a gig (as they say in showbiz). Her father (one of the best characters in the show) initially does not have a supportive response to her becoming a comedienne but we do see moments of solidarity between the father and daughter when he does realize the impact she has on people. She treaded the treacherous waters of showbiz in darkness (with susie) but these small acts peeked through the sky as singular rays of sunshine when she needed them the most.

## GROWTH OR AT LEAST THE LACK OF IT
After her falling out with Shy, we see a very different side to Midge. She still wants to be the best but this time she wants to do it all on her own terms. 
>"No more opening act gigs.I do gigs where I can say what I want to say."
 
She gets her full circle moment but not in the way she expected- she is back at gaslight, performing for the same small,drunk audience. She finds out about a strip club where she realises that she could speak her mind and people would still come to watch her. Midge also takes the additional role of making the strip club a more comfortable place for the women working there. She revamps the lighting, the microphones, the formations- on the whole making the entire process smoother. But we also painstakingly watch her career develop no-where. She isn't afraid of taking a bigger stage but she isn't willing to give up this stubborn , no-career-growth livelihood until Lenny Bruce calls her out and sets her straight. (who by doing this becomes another important character in midge’s growth).
>"Because you are not gonna get here hiding yourself in a club that technically doesn't exist." - Lenny Bruce

## GUTS
Tiny specs of someone’s life are easy to analyse. If I had to look at Midge’s career and life as a whole, if there is one thing that stands out like those inflatable humanoid-balloons at retail shops- it is her guts. When her father showed up impromptu at her set (he did not know she was a comedienne then), she had the guts to persevere and not falter. Maybe it's getting up on stage in Paris where people don't even understand her language and delivering a fantastic monologue or refusing to voice for a politician with terrible propaganda she had the guts to do it with her trademark effortless grace. 
